# FINAL PROJECT OVERVIEW

For my final project submission, I used a PD controller and an ESP32 to control a brushless DC motor. This README contains the hardware used by the system, the system electronics and wiring, and the software to drive the system. By the end of this README, you should build and replicate the results exaclty from this final project! At least, that is my hope with this README :)


## Tools Needed:
- Wire strippers
- Dupont wire crimper
- Dupont wire connectors, or Arduino jumper wires (a LOT, see wiring diagram)
- Soldering tool
- Solder
- [1] large C-clamp
- 3/16 allen wrench (I think)

## Hardware Requirements
- [1] ESP32-WROOM-32: https://a.co/d/05TtJUjU
- [1] USB-C data cable
- [1] Hoverboard Motor: https://a.co/d/0681CQAJ (DO NOT BUY THIS - this is just an example of the motor. Any 3-Phase, 120 degree out-of-phase motor with an included hall effect sensor *should* work)
- [1] RioRand 350W 6-60V 3-Phase PWM DC Brushless Motor Speed Controller with Hall Sensor: https://a.co/d/0fNlEnNE
- [1] Any 28V (or more) power supply will work, measured no-load power was ~10 Watts 
- [n] 1515 8020 aluminum extrusion (see attached CAD for exact details and dimensions, though these are not hard requirements)
- [3] 15 series 8020 Tall Gusseted Inside Corner Bracket: https://8020.net/4336.html
- [3] 15 series 8020 Lite Transition Inside Corner Bracket: https://8020.net/4509.html
- [20] 15 series 8020 Bolt Assembly: https://8020.net/3320.html
- [1] Breadboard or equivalent way of connecting circuitry together (see circuit diagram below, or here [TODO - attach link])
- [1] One-turn analog potentiometer
- [2] 2.2k Ohm resistors
- [1] basic on/off switch
- [20] WAGO Lever-Nuts 3-Conductors varient (or more, less probably won't work without being annoying): https://a.co/d/0gCFwZCQ
- [1] Taiss/Incremental Rotary Quadrature Encoder, 600P/R: https://a.co/d/0cLU70xH
- 3D printer or ability to 3D print 3 components
- [1] goBilda 1309 Series Sonic Hub (6mm D-Bore): https://www.gobilda.com/1309-series-sonic-hub-6mm-d-bore/
- [3] M3 x 8mm
- [4] M4 x 20mm
- [2] M4 x 12mm

## Software Requirements
- ESP-IDF v2.1.0 (I used the VScode plugin and followed instructions on getting it working directly from Espressif): https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/stable/esp32/get-started/index.html
- Visual Studio Code
- Windows 11 (?)

## Software Configuration
In your project configuration, specifically in ```sdkconfig```, you must change the following parameters:

```CONFIG_FREERTOS_HZ=100```

Change this too:

```CONFIG_FREERTOS_HZ=1000```

# SETTING UP THE HARDWARE
## Step 1: print the hardware
The system relies on three 3D prints to connect the motor and the encoder. The motor doesn't have any traditional mounting holes since it was original designed to spin a tire really fast, and the tire was built into the rotor. As such, we need to print an adapter to allow us to connect the motor and the encoder. We also need to print a mount for the encoder.

### MOTOR SIDE PRINTS
The two prints that are attached to the motor are the armature and direction arrow. You can find them here [TODO - ADD LINK]

[ADD photos]

### ENCODER SIDE PRINTS
The only print needed for the encoder is it's mount, which you can find here: [TODO - ADD LINK]

[ADD photos]

### 8020 MOTOR MOUNT
Because this is a little complex and also not necessarily required (another mounting method can be designed), see the CAD for more detail [TODO - ADD LINK]

[TODO - ADD PICTURES OF THE CAD]

# SETTING UP THE ELECTRONICS
Below is an electrical schematic of the system. You can utilize the WAGO connectors for most connections, however you will need jumper wires for connecting to the ESP32 and other peripherals. The general implementation is up to interpretation, however the exact wiring of the system used for this project is reflected in the wiring diagram!

[TODO -ADD PICTURE OF WIRING DIAGRAM]

# SETTING UP THE SOFTWARE
After installing Visual Studio Code, ESP-IDF, and the VSCode ESP-IDF extension, you can then clone this repository, or whatever means you want to get the ESP32 project code onto your own machine. Once it's on your machine and your project is configured, you should be able to build, flash, and monitor the code out-of-the-box! There are no external libraries utilized, just ESP32 libraries, C libraries, and FreeRTOS libraries (which should be downloaded with ESP-IDF).

## Software Overview
You will find all the code to run this project in one simply file: *`the_main_thingy.c`*. This File is located in the FinalProj/rotary_encoder/main/ folder. It's CMakeList.txt file (generated by ESP-IDF) is also in that file

There are three main tasks being run by the ESP32:
- The control task, running at 1000 Hz on CORE 1
    
- The potentiometer task, running at 100 Hz on CORE 0
    - Running it at 100 Hz allows the potentiometer to be sampled rather quickly and enable good tracking of the system
- The display task, running at 10 Hz on CORE 0
    - Because this is not a critical task, we run at an O.K. speed

### The Control Loop Task [```position_pid_task()```]
This task runs the PD control loop, and thats it! It reads the encoder counts from the onboard pulse counter, computes the command signal, and then writes a PWM value. The control loop itself is very standard:
- read() [```ctrl_loop_read(int *encoder_counts)```]
    - read the measurements from the incremental encoder, specifically read the output from ```pcnt_unit_get_count()```
- update() [```compute_position_pid_standard(float err, float prev_err, pid_gains gains, float freq)```]
    - Get the user command, and generate the control signal from the PD controller 
    - note that err, prev_err are computed in the task's while loop, not in the above function. pid_gains and frequency should technically be constants
- write() [```ctrl_loop_write(float *U)```]
    - Generate the PWM signal based on the PD controllers output, and write it to the PWM generator using ```ledc_set_duty()``` and ```ledc_update_duty()```

There is an additional update function called ```compute_position_pid_velocity(float err, float vel, pid_gains gains)``` which uses the velocity as a damping factor, rather than the change in error

#### Data Structures
There are two custom data structure implemented to ease function inputs, the ```pid_gains``` struct and the `pid_mode` enumerator. `pid_gains` stores the PID gains for the controller. The members of the struct Kp, Kd, and Ki are set before the beginning of the while loop in the task. `pid_mode` is used to switch between change in error PID or direct velocity PID


#### Interesting Things
To reduce the need to divide, many conversion factors which would require divison are pre-computed before the beginning of the while loop. In addition, rather than deriving the position measurements to get measured velocity using the common formula:

```(p(t) - p(t-1))/dt```

We use:

```(p(t) - p(t-1))*freq```

Since our control frequency is stable (or at least, should be thanks to FreeRTOS), we can say that our delta time is "constant" and 1/dt = 1/period = frequency. Thus, saving us the need to divide in order to get velocity. This is done a lot, where the inverse is computed ahead of time and then multiplied by, in an attempt to *not have to divide.*

We also used ```vTaskDelayUntil()``` rather than ```vTaskDelay()``` since we want our code to mandate a 1kHz frequency. Seemingly, the control loop computation is faster than 1 ms, allowing us to wait until we 1ms has passed before returning

Finally, we also store the the actual position, desired position (or commanded), the encoder counts, the error, and the control signal in global buffers labeled ```ACTUAL_POS```, ```ENCODER_COUNTS```, ```ERROR```, ```CONTROL_SIGNAL``` so that our display task can handle printing to the terminal, rather than the control loop.

We SHOULD filter the velocity signal using a low-pass filter (example from here: https://kiritchatterjee.wordpress.com/2014/11/10/a-simple-digital-low-pass-filter-in-c/) because it's WAY noisy! But I haven't implemented that yet. I should probably filter the potentiometer too!

### The Potentiometer Task [`read_potentiometer_task()`]
This is pretty much stripped directly from their example, as there was no point in fixing a broken clock if it's right twice a day, or something like that! You can find the ESP32 source code here: https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/v6.0.1/examples/peripherals/adc/continuous_read

### The Display Task [`display_control_data_task()`]
This task is very straight forward. Get the data from the buffers, and then print it to the console!


## Final Takeaways
Many of the things implemented for this project were borrowed from other pioneers on the internet. Here are my sources:
- Motor driver wiring information: https://mad-ee.com/easy-inexpensive-hoverboard-motor-controller/
- ESP32 pinouts: https://lastminuteengineers.com/esp32-pinout-reference/
- ESP32-IDF examples (of which I used many): https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/v6.0.1/examples
    - potentiometer: https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/v6.0.1/examples/peripherals/adc/continuous_read
    - PWM generator: https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/v6.0.1/examples/peripherals/ledc/ledc_basic
    - Generic GPIO: https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/v6.0.1/examples/peripherals/gpio/generic_gpio
    - Encoder counter: https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/v6.0.1/examples/peripherals/pcnt/rotary_encoder
    - Duty Cycle and Precision calculations: https://documentation.espressif.com/esp32_technical_reference_manual_en.pdf#ledpwm, https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/v4.3/esp32/api-reference/peripherals/ledc.html
    - PID control loop with a similar device: https://geekeeceebee.com/DCMotor%20Position%20Tracking.html
    - Task creation stuff: https://randomnerdtutorials.com/esp32-dual-core-arduino-ide/

Without the above documentation, this project (which I started on 5/8, and ended on 5/11... my parts didn't come in until 5/6!!) I would have NEVER been able to actually build this system, let alone get it running. But, I've gotten it running, and I'm quite proud of the little scamp. The poorly tuned, aggressive, spaghetti-like scamp. Hopefully if you are reading this, you may also one day be proud of your own little PID testbed, maybe even this very one!
